Today I have uh Dr. Thomas Safreed.
>> He is a leading researcher and professor
in the field of cancer biology and
metabolism and he is best known for his
pioneering work that I have taken the
time to read and read his book uh which
I think is fascinating um and which
challenges conventional genetic based
model of cancer development. I think Dr.
safe freed is research is actually quite
a marvel to see you know and focuses on
the idea that cancer is primarily a
metabolic disease rather than just
purely genetic one u and everything
related to mitochondrial dysfunction
makes a whole lot of sense when you
start putting the pieces together
Dr. uh safe is also a professor at the
Boston College and that's where he does
all of his research and uh he's
dedicated I think all of his life to
trying to find an answer and solutions
to be able to treat patients who have
cancer. Something that I admire very
much and thanks to your book uh Dr. safe
freed I've been able to help my patients
my cancer patients and improve their
outcomes and even some of them even
reaching remission which is something
that I never thought I would be doing
one day so I have a great respect for
your work Dr. safe read and I think that
many people need to hear what you are
doing. Your contribution is a great one
for for humanity I think you know and I
hope one day you receive like a Nobel
Prize for what you're doing here you
know.
>> Yeah. Well well thank you very much
Eduardo. It's nice to be here and have
the opportunity to uh address address
your questions. You know, it's not I I
didn't plan my life to be here to to do
this. Th this is a very interesting No
one can plan uh years in advance of of
what they do. When you're trained in
foundational principles of biology and
genetics like I was at Illinois State
University with Herman Brockman and at
the University of Illinois with Bill
with Bill Daniel and Evelyn Weber and
then at Yale University in the epilepsy
field and then here you know it
converges at some point where you begin
to connect the dots from a lot of diver
diverse fields and I was always doing
research not always but we we had a lot
of tumors and epilepsy and all these And
eventually you get crossed wires and all
of a sudden you make observations
uh that are foundationally solid
scientifically but not recognized or
appreciated by the entire cancer field
and then you find yourself you think
you're crazy uh because you see
something so clear and everybody else is
still beating the bush looking looking
for gene mutations which are largely
irrelevant to the nature of the disease.
>> So um it's unbelievable. So
>> yes. Oh well, you know I the way how
things are taught in medical school for
you know medical doctors and and
residents you know we we have no idea. I
mean we just basically follow you know
protocols protocols protocols this drug
for this this type of cancer this drug
for this other type of disease and and
literally they don't teach us the
foundations you know how you know cancer
actually really plays plays out right
>> um and this is something that should be
incorporated into medical schools you
know it should be taught you know we
should be receiving this type of
education I think and uh and there's
there's a shift that needs to take place
you know in in medical education Yeah.
Well, but they are getting that they're
they're getting the education. When all
my students go to medical school, uh
their first year in the biochemistry and
principles, they say cancer is a genetic
disease. Uh and they tell you about all
these wonderful mutations that are
causing disregulated cell growth and you
got to target this and target that.
>> And and they never said they they either
don't know or don't understand that it's
not a genetic disease. And we have we
have clearly shown that these mutations
are downstream epiphenomen of damage to
the oxidative phosphorin. And they don't
say that in the medical schools. They
and if they do, they get their hands
slapped or or they're told don't say
that,
>> you know, it's like
>> Yeah, it's crazy, you know. I mean, and
the the idea I mean, I've had I've had a
couple of encounters with some
oncologists and when we start talking
about, you know, metabolic therapy, all
of a sudden their eyes start to roll
back, you know, but I understand, you
know, where they're coming from and the
way how they, you know, been
doctrinized, I guess you could say, to
thinking [clears throat] in such a way,
but you need to have people that
actually go out there and trying to, you
know, start changing the, you know, the
there has to be a shift, you know, in
the way of we think and do things, you
know, and one of the best ways to do
that is by bringing information to to
all the public, even doctors, because
I've seen a lot of your videos and many
of the interviews that you give with a
lot of people. And, you know, I every
time I see one of your videos, I learn
something new, you know. Um, but I think
it's always important to also bring this
information to South America. I mean,
people down over there, they need to be
able to know what's actually going on,
you know, in in other parts of the
world, right?
>> And and and this this interview
obviously is going to be translated to
Portuguese and also to Spanish.
>> So people over there in South America
will be be able to
>> to see, you know, what you have to say.
And so my question is, uh, Dr. Safe
Freed, so what got you into, uh,
metabolic therapy to begin with? How how
did that all begin? Well, you know, as I
said, we were doing work on epilepsy at
Yale University. Um, and I had developed
a lot of models uh for epilepsy and um
we were mapping genes. We were genetic.
I'm a geneticist, mamalian geneticist,
biochemist by trade. And uh you know,
the the hot thing was map genes. Map
genes. Find the genes that are causing
the epileptic seizures. and and we were
doing that and we were looking at very
polygienic traits and and
multiffactorial traits and it was always
a gene environmental interaction of some
sort. Uh we car we looked at back at
Gowowers dictim all the foundational
principles of the field of epilepsy and
we had models that mimicked all this
kind of stuff. Then one of my students
said, "Oh, there's a big meeting in
Seattle, Washington, uh on on ketogenic
diets uh for for epilepsy."
>> If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press pulse
protocol into your cancer management,
just visit school.com/keto
for cancer, the new community by our
research analyst Johnny Rocker Meyer.
Within this new community platform, you
can connect with other patients and
learn from their experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement.
Starting with the general scientific
concepts by Dr. Thomas Ciphford. We will
show you how to start the ketogenic
diet, including which foods to choose
and which to avoid. Additionally, we
prepared a list of doctors specialized
in metabolic therapy as well as details
about glutamine inhibition and
hyperbaric oxygen protocols. So, take a
look around at school.com/ keto for
cancer.
And when I was at Yale, I I thought
maybe I could write an internal grant
for epilep uh for ketogenic diet to
study my epilepsy model. Ah, nobody is
interested. They said, "Well, don't
waste your time." uh epilep uh ketogenic
diet for epilepsy is p uh the big thing
is molecular molecular targeting same
thing uh molecular targeting of of genes
that uh disrupt electrical excitability
in the brain. So find those genes. They
were telling me, "Okay, I'll map I'll
publish papers mapping genes." And I did
all this stuff. And then when my student
came back, she was so excited about Jim
Abrams uh and char the Charlie
Foundation and all this uh about
ketogenic diet stopping all kinds of
epilepsy. So I I put it on the mice, the
calorierestricted ketogenic. Oh my god,
all these m all these mice stop seizing.
And it didn't make any damn difference
what the gene was. They it affected the
whole physiology of the of the mouse.
she stops easing. And then we realized
that it was mostly calorie restriction
and we linked it to low glucose and
elevated ketones. And it was really the
glucose uh shifting that was stopping
the seizures. The ketones were elevated
as a compensatory signal. Uh but we were
doing biochemistry of brain tumors in
the lab at the same time looking at
glyosphing lipid metabolism. I was a big
shot in this whole area. Glycosphing
lipids characterizing all these things.
Oh yeah. We had we were foundational uh
hard hardcore brute force biochemists
and geneticists. So I clearly had I
clearly had the background and the
knowhow about every all this kind of
stuff. And then we said, "Oh, let's
throw some uh ketogenic diet at these
mice restricted calorie rest." Oh my
god. It was more powerful to reduce
tumors than it was in the epilepsy
thing.
>> Exactly.
>> But I had no clue. And then uh Linda
Nebling at at Case Western Reserve
University uh gave two little hopeless
kids uh high-grade Lyola kids a
ketogenic diet. And they both responded
remarkably well. Uh and I said, "Wow,
look at that." And I said, "How that
what's going on with this?" And she
said, "It might have something to do
with the work of Otto Warberg."
>> So I I always heard of and most of us in
field of biochemistry have heard of Otto
Warberg. The problem is I didn't know
what he really did. And then I started
looking at at his papers and reading
them over and over. I read Warberg's
some of Warberg's papers more than 50
times. Um, and each time I I read it, I
find another kernel of new information
that I didn't know or didn't appreciate.
>> And then I said, "Wow, Warberg said that
all cancer results from a defect in
oxidative phosphorilation coupled to a
compensatory fermentation."
And uh uh which means that the
fermentation driven by glucose and uh we
started looking at um mitochondria in in
in mouse brain tumors and found they
they all their mitochondria were
defective in one way or the other.
>> Yes.
>> And they were all dependent on glucose.
I said, "My god, this guy Warberg must
have had it right." [laughter]
And and then I said, "Why?" Uh oh. And
then you look in and everybody said
Warberg was wrong. I said, "Why?" Well,
my god. Okay, Warberg is wrong. Should I
waste my time? And then and then I I
found out um they said he was wrong
because tumor cells take in as much
oxygen as normal cells and therefore
oxidative phosphorilation can't be uh
the cause of cancer like Warberg said in
his hypothesis.
>> So uh and that changed the whole well
the fail the field ran off chasing genes
like lemmings over the cliff. that
mindless a mindless mass migration of
top scientists.
>> Yeah.
>> Running after genes, leaving the
metabolism field to to rest in peace
>> pretty much. Forget about Warberg.
Forget about all this stuff. Let's go
chase genes.
>> Um just like the epilepsy field, right?
Everybody's chasing anything, man. You
find a anything wrong with you found
some gene mutation like it's right at
the you know. So, uh um but any event.
Yeah. So everybody was chasing genes a
and I'm sitting there saying, "Wait a
minute now. This guy Warberg may not
have been wrong. I I did research in my
lab that seems to support what
[laughter] this guy is saying."
>> Yeah.
>> So I I said, "What the hell?" So I
started then we did a deep dive on the
structure of mitochondria and man
they're broken up. They're they're not
efficient. They're not functional.
>> And then I he said he said, "Oh, then
they have to start fermenting glucose."
So the field that those guys that are
not that are chasing genes but also
doing metabolism said well Warberg is
wrong because the tumor cells are taking
in oxygen. So what I I what I have done
since then is uh we have now found that
tumor cells do indeed take in oxygen
like normal cells but they're not using
it for
>> exactly oxidative phosphorilation.
>> Exactly. Yeah.
>> To make reactive oxygen species which is
causing the mutations in the nucleus.
>> That's right. Right. So I said, "Oh my
god, this whole cancer field is off
wrong path.
>> They're off on the wrong path. They're
chasing tales. They're chasing effects,
not causes. [laughter]
>> That's just that's just mind-blowing."
>> Yeah. So So when you do all that and
then you and then our big discovery now,
we we validated what Warberg did, but we
found something that he never knew about
and that was the fermentation of the
amino acid glutamine. He and the field
all the field talks about is glycolysis
and oxos. glycolysis and oxos.
>> We have now found in the mitochondria
itself, the broken mitochondria can get
energy from fermenting the amino acid
glutamine. Oh my god, this is
unbelievable. [laughter] Now, now we can
now we can we can uh fix up so much of
the confusion and bring the field back
on track.
>> These damn cancer cells need to ferment.
>> It's it's a it's it's a necessity. It's
a requirement. They can't live without
the ferment. Why? Because their oxfos is
insufficient. It's not that it's not
that complicated. And but yet when you
look at a the NCI, National Cancer
Institute says, "Oh, there's 100
different diseases, all very
complicated. Everybody's complicated,
complicated, complicated." Yeah. Because
you're looking at the wrong you're
working under the wrong theory.
>> So you bring it right back. You bring it
back on track. And cancer can be managed
very very effectively, non-toxically, if
you simultaneously target the fuels that
are driving the disregulated growth.
>> Exactly. Exactly. I can be testament to
that because I've seen I've seen my
patients improve. I've seen patients who
have colon cancer. I've seen patients
who have breast cancer, melanoma. I mean
I'm an internist and a dermatologist and
I treat my patients with using your
metabolic therapy [clears throat] and
and I do you know hyperbaric medicine as
well you know and vitamin C and we also
use some med some repurposed medications
like you also propose as well uh like
meendazol inf and we do see the results
I mean it's it's just it's it's
outstanding you know and and I I
personally you know at first I must be
honest with you Dr. Safe Freed I was a
little bit skeptical you know and I felt
yeah well I don't know maybe I had a lot
of doubts like any doctor would you know
and I think that's that's that's a
normal a normal response from any any
practical position but then you start
looking at I started reading your book
you know and then I said well you know
what that makes so much sense you know
the mitochondrial dysfunction and
everything and glucose and glutamine and
I was like this guy's right? You know,
you there's a lot of things that's going
on here that makes sense. So, I took a
risk, you know, and I I had this I was a
it was a very close family member of
mine who was diagnosed with adino
carcinoma, the large intestine,
>> and I said, you know what? Um, I think
we should give it a try. this we should
give another approach to this you know
because it was already stage three you
know and the doctors basically told you
know we don't the way how the tumors sit
in and everything going to be very hard
to to operate you know uh and we're not
going to be able to take out everything
and Edwell said you know what we we
should consider going a different route
and we did that and thankfully today is
still alive he's in remission no cancer
you know, and he's kicking, you know,
and he's always very thankful for
everything and and he's a big very big,
you know, fan of your work. He watches
all of your videos, by the way.
>> Yeah. [laughter] Well, well, you know, I
I tell you th those are the kinds of
patients that respond the best. Um
because I get all these emails
constantly from all these poor folks,
and they usually come to metabolic
therapy after everything fails. Uh
they've been they've been treated with
toxic poisons, uh massive doses of
radiation, surgical mutilations, you
know, all these kinds of cut slash burn.
And you know, your body is beat to hell.
Uh we we did not evolve to be taking red
devil Dr. Rubeson into our pissing red
and all this kind of stuff. This is
nuts. What are you doing to these
people? I [laughter] mean,
>> crazy.
>> Yeah. And then they still survive. They
they it's hard to kill a human being
doing all this [laughter] stuff, you
know,
right?
They still survive, but then their body
is so beat up the cancer eventually uh
takes over. But when we get uh fresh
people of people that were just
diagnosed and they weren't treated with
the standards of care, uh they respond
the best and and and if they're if
they're on board with what they have to
shoulder in their in their battle with
cancer, this is truly, oh, he's battling
his cancer. When you do metabolic
therapy, you are in fact battling your
cancer. Yes. When you do state of the
care, you sit there like some mannequin
being nuked and poisoned, you know. So,
uh um but yeah, a lot of it so falls on
the shoulders of the patient. So, what
we what we did, we developed the glucose
ketone index calculator.
>> Yes.
>> Uh which is to call the GKI, the glucose
ketone index. And when cancer patients
get into the low GKI of 2.0 or below,
that's where blood sugar comes down,
ketones come up. uh those cancer cells
start getting hammered and they start
getting weak and they start suff
suffering and then we come in uh with
the embendol and and fenbendazol and
some of these other drugs
>> and and we start targeting the glutamine
the gluc and I and then we wrote the
press pulse therapeutic strategy which
dovetales evolutionary biology uh
paleobiology into the treatment of
cancer
>> and that was the framework uh uh the
what clinicians could do
>> but we did not have a day-to-day
treatment protocol uh for that. We put
the skeleton the framework of the
strategy that will eventually be will
will eventually become the standard of
care for cancer. Um but the paper we
have under review right now fleshes out
the skeleton and really really it's a
comprehensive treatment protocol
allowing physicians to know what to do
if they see this change when they see
that. And so it's a really it's a really
comprehensive treat and once once that's
out in the in the public when we can
publish it open access um and therefore
patients can just simply take that and
throw it on the doctor's desk and say
this do this for me will you?
[clears throat]
>> Oh that'd be awesome and I can't wait.
[laughter]
>> Yeah,
>> I'm so excited. Um I think I I I I truly
know that you know it's it's the hardest
thing I guess for patients is that and
I'm talking on behalf of of my patients
obviously. I think the hardest thing is
that um they have to, you know, once
they're diagnosed and they're tell, hey,
you have cancer, you know, they have to,
you know, confront the system.
>> Yeah.
>> And the the system is just it's a it's a
monster. I'm going to I'm going to be
straight forward. It it literally is a
big monster that puts on a lot of fear,
a lot of pressure. I mean, these
patients are really, you know, pressured
into chemotherapy, radiation, surgery,
>> and it it's it's overwhelming, you know,
how they they they just b they're
they're afraid. I mean, everybody who
has cancer, I mean, obviously, they're
going to be afraid. Um, and finding, you
know, someone that works within the
field of metabolic therapy to be able to
treat their cancer patients, you know,
first of all, there aren't many
providers out there to begin with. So I
think it's it's important that we start
you know training doctors you know
training physicians and training
healthcare providers with metabolic
therapy because we need more people
trained in this field you know I mean
it's it has a tremendous impact on
patients lives you know
>> and this is why I think that your work
that you're doing is you know it's it's
it's
>> well that's the that's the um that's the
you actually touched the the the the
real weakness in this whole thing is
that there's very few people trained
They they never heard of what we're
saying uh because they were told cancer
is a genetic disease by the top uh
leaders in the field at the top medical
schools, the top cancer centers, the
National Cancer Institute. They all say
cancer is a genetic disease. How could
all these folks be wrong? Um they're
wrong. They're flat wrong. Uh and I have
all the evidence to show that if people
read it.
>> Exactly. But once on Okay. So, but we
don't want to throw out the what they're
doing. Uh because once you realize that
if you take the patient when they're
first diagnosed and then put them on a
met rigorous metabolic therapy,
>> they get healthier and healthier. And
then if you need to use chemo, uh you
can use it in very restricted dosages,
uh very low dosages at at predictable
times.
>> Yeah. uh and therefore get more bang for
your buck uh killing tumor cells while
not harming the patient. And you can do
that for radiation for all tissues
except brain. We've clearly indicated
that irdiating somebody's brain is like
u the worst thing you can do to somebody
and it contributes it it's responsible
for for um preventing long-term survival
for brain cancer. It's largely
responsible for taking that opportunity
away for people. Uh but all other so you
we know that when you irdiate somebody
blood sugar goes through the roof. Uh
but if you already are under a
metabolically restricted uh regimen and
you irdiate in a small dose you can kill
off a buttload of tumor cells with
minimal toxicity.
>> Oh yeah.
>> So so we're not and even imunotherapies
which are based on an incorrect theory.
uh if if you shrink tumors down to just
a few surviving cells that are not uh
not completely gone with metabolic
therapy, they they may all share
something in common because they've been
able to survive what we threw at them.
Then an imunotherapy, a targeted
imunotherapy might be able to hit the
commonality of all those cells and wipe
them out completely.
>> Exactly.
>> We have we have all of the tools
necessary for long-term resolution of
cancer with minimal toxicity. It's just
that nobody knows how to use them yet.
>> Exactly. And that's how it should be
done, you know. I think that's how we're
supposed to be, you know, giving we
should be, you know, using metabolic
therapy as the priority first, you know,
use that as the leading, you know,
source of treatment and then use the
other ones just kind of like backups.
>> Yes.
>> I I think, you know, I mean, at least I
see it in my patients and I have a
couple of patients,
>> they're not doing any type of
chemotherapy. [clears throat] They're
not doing any type of radiation therapy.
You know, I know that and and yes, you
know, insulin potentiation therapy and
all that. I think that does benefit to a
certain degree, but my patients decided,
Dr. Beltran, I do not want to go and do
>> chemotherapy anymore. You know, I've
I've had side effects. I've gotten sick.
I've gotten worse. I just want to deal
with it anymore. I want to work with
this.
>> And I said, "Okay, we'll do it." And
then when we start working with, you
know, metabolic therapy, doing the
ketogenic diet, measuring their GKI,
making sure that they're taking their
supplements, you know, and doing
hyperbaric medicine if it's available in
their in their their city, we start
seeing that the cancer starts to to
reduce in size. And I and at one time we
even had one of the the radiologist
called me and he said, "Uh, Dr. Beltra
and I'm a little bit concerned because
um this is the first time I'm seeing a
patient who had breast cancer and now
I'm starting to see that the breast
cancer has reduced in 40%. you know, I
mean, what are you doing? You know,
[laughter]
>> and they they always they say the same
thing to me. Well, when my when when the
people I'm not a physician, I can't do
what you do, but but when the patients
show the oncologists how the they do the
cat MRI, PET, whatever they're looking
at, and it's going down, it's getting
smaller, and they always seem to be
miffed. Oh, wow. I don't know what
happened. Well, for crying out loud, we
know exactly what happened. Don't you
read the scientific [laughter]
literature? Unfortunately, no.
>> Yeah. [clears throat] Yes. It's it's
it's incredible. Um Dr. Safe, what would
you think, you know, uh the first thing
a patient should consider, you know,
once they get diagnosed with cancer?
What are the first things that you would
recommend a patient to start doing?
Well, u in the in the clinic that that
uh we work with some um physicians
assistants and things like this who have
a little bit more flexibility in private
clinics. Um the first thing in our
treatment protocol, as a matter of fact,
I'm just giving you the upfront on this.
Um you know, we look at the blood work
of the patient. We we and and and we
look very at things you would never look
well of course vitamin D for sure and
all the other things that we look at.
parasites and and we see how many
parameters are out of balance uh in the
patient and and we find oftentimes they
have diabetes, they have high blood
pressure, hypertension, they got all
kinds of things that screw up their
blood work. Um so we have to try to
bring that individual back to some level
of of metabolic homeostasis.
And uh we can either do water fat
depending on the on the patient or um
zero carb diet for about 10 to 14 days
um where they can eat meat and they can
eat fish and they can eat chicken and
they can eat you know uh things
>> but but there's no carbs in the diet,
>> right?
>> And the body then slowly re we're going
back to our paleolithic we're ancestry.
We we're all of our ancestors uh 200,000
years ago were always in nutritional
ketosis and our ancestors did not die
from cancer. They died from infections
and injuries. Uh so we in our modern
medicine we we have antibiotics for
infections and we have orthopedic
surgeons for for uh injuries.
>> So we can fix a lot of the things that
killed our ancestors.
>> And our ancestors did not have diabetes
or cancer or high blood pressure or
dementia we that we know of. Um so they
were dying from other things. But once
you bring the body back into a state of
nutritional ketosis um the par blood
parameters start to come online and then
we begin to tack the glutamine uh
because all that will lower glucose,
elevate ketones. Tumor cells can't use
ketones or fatty acids. So that's a fuel
for normal cells. The tumor cells are
then marginalized, but they still
survive because they have access to the
amino acid glutamine, which is the most
abundant amino acid in our body.
>> That's right.
>> But we can't go into glutamine targeting
like a bull in a china shop be because
that we need glutamine for the gut. Uh
the our immune system needs glutamine,
the gut needs glutamine, the ura cycle.
All of these things are dependent on
availability of glutamine.
>> That's where we come in with the pulse.
That's why we wrote the press pulse
therapeutic strategy. You can press
glucose down. We don't need that. and
the body can make little bits of it. Uh
you do exercise because when you ex if
you're on metabolic therapy and you
exercise, muscle takes glucose out of
the blood.
>> Muscle does not share glucose with other
organs. And that's an evolutionary
conserved adaptation. If a if a a
predator is chasing you, you you better
be able to run. And if you shared all
your [laughter] glucose in the muscles,
you are now dead duck. This guy's going
to eat you. So uh and the brain what
little is left in the blood blood does
it go the brain has first dibs on that
the tumor is down the ladder way far uh
for its need for glue. So it's going to
get hammered. So you got to bring the
blood work back. You you got to do some
exercise and then we go in strategically
with mendazol fenazol and some other
drugs dons. Oh that's a powerful that's
the best there is. Wow. Which we can't
get a hold of.
>> Uh but if we had that should be the
number one cancer drug used worldwide is
donna. It's not you.
>> I know. I know. Uh so so if you could go
ahead and please explain uh to our to to
my audience, you know, in in in in
Brazil and in in in South America, why
glutamine, you know, is so important for
cancer for for for cancer cells, you
know, besides glucose, you know, and why
these medications how these medications,
you know, inhibit uh cancer growth.
>> Yeah. Well, uh, the cancer needs carbons
and nitrogen to grow energy. You need
ATP, which is the energy source, and
then you have to have carbons because
you need to synthesize lipids, proteins,
and nucleic acids,
>> right?
>> So, uh, but where's the nitrogen coming
from? Glucose can provide all that, but
it can't make proteins or nucleic acids
uh because there's a nitrogen shortage.
So the glutamine comes in and glutamine
has two nitrogens, the amide nitrogen
and the internal nitrogen. So you can
start using those nitrogens for ura
cycle. It makes ammonia. It does a lot
of different things. And then of course
you can synthesize DNA RNA proteins uh
with the nitrogen that's coming from
glutamine. Also cancer cells are u
produce a lot of reactive oxygen species
which causes the mutations and damages a
lot of things. But they don't die
because they have a powerful ant um
antioxidant
biology and that antioxidant biology
comes from an elevation of glutathione
inside the cancer cell which is coming
from gluc glucose and and glutamine. So
so not only is the glutamine needed for
nitrogen and growth uh it also protects
the cancer cell against its own rust
damage.
>> Ross damage.
>> Yes. A a and also as we have shown uh it
generates energy through uh what we call
substrate level mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorilation. So it can produce
energy through ferment in absence of
oxygen.
>> It's unbelievable.
>> So this molecule is so important but if
you attack glutamine too aggressively
you damage your microbiome uh you damage
your antioxidant systems. You damage you
you paralyze your immune system. So when
we kill cancer cells, we have to have an
army of immune cells coming into the
battlefield picking up the dead cancer
cell, the corpses.
>> And if we if otherwise you get
infections and you get all kinds of
repercussions from this. So you have to
honor that's why we call it pulsing.
Pulse all on off on off. It keeps
everything working and you're killing
these damn cancer cells without
toxicity. What's wrong with this?
>> Yeah. Yeah. That's that's that's super
it's super interesting. you know I I
think you know is that it's just the the
way how we we see things and and the and
understanding how metabolism plays a
humongous role in how cancer you know re
reshapes literally its environment
around it you know is it's pretty
fascinating I mean the whole field of
cancer uh metabolism is is it's
impressive you know and you really you
really did a great job in in explaining
a lot of things in your book I think you
know whoever has the opportunity to be
able to read your book, you know, if at
least if you're the on the healthc care
field, you know, uh it's a little bit
complex for some maybe lay person, but
definitely you did a great job being
explaining everything, you know,
everything just makes such such nice
sense.
>> Well, you have to realize it it makes
sense, but you have to know the
mechanisms of action and the details and
that's explained in our publications
which are open access.
>> Yes.
>> So, people always ask me, oh, he didn't
explain this, he didn't do that. want to
go. I can't in an hour do all this. I
mean, you're talking about 2530 years of
exper of of hard data collection in the
lab. Um, but it's all published in our
papers. Uh, so Dr.
>> So let me go ahead and and and dive in a
little bit into I guess you could say my
field because I I work with vitamin D.
You know, I'm a vitamin D researcher and
I treat a lot of patients with a
protocol that I also developed known as
the leaky gut syndrome protocol, which I
use high vitamin D doses. Um, what have
you seen that vitamin D does to be able
to benefit cancer patients?
>> Um, well, we we we we haven't looked at
that um other than when we do the blood
work and if it is low that it's
supplemented.
>> Correct. So, so you you want to you want
to bring vitamin D into the levels that
are uh normal, probably on the higher
range, a little bit more on the higher
range of what you can what you would
normally do. You don't want to give them
because you can if you get too much
vitamin D, you can get a kind of a
neurotox vitamin D toxicity.
>> Toxicity. Yeah.
>> Uh and everything. We don't want to ever
create anything. So we want to be
balanced and and when you find a lot of
cancer patients have very low levels of
vitamin D clearly that's one of the
supplements that you must introduce to
the patient to bring them back to
metabolic homeostasis. Uh, and when
you're in that and then you lower the
glucose that they need to grow and then
you come in w with glutamine targeting,
but always maintaining the blood work in
a in a in a in a homeostatic state with
vitamin D,
>> you know, and and all the other markers
that we look at. And we when we do
calorierestricted ketogenic diet,
metabolic therapy, uh we see
triglycerides going way down, the HDL
goes up, LDL goes down, uh vitamin D
goes up, all the different things that
and all of a sudden, man, you say, "This
guy should be super healthy." And then
they say to us, "I've never felt better
in my life."
>> Exactly. Yes. despite the fact that I
have this tumor and the the idea is I
said well we're gonna the tumors doesn't
feel so you might feel good but the
tumor does not feel so good.
>> Yeah. Well, well, one of the things
switching gears, I guess we could talk a
little bit about the microbiome. You
know, I think I think this is this is
the field of where we now are starting
to explore in the last 15 years, the
microbiome. And it's it's brought a lot
of interesting things. And I think one
of the things that we started to notice
is that there are some cancers that
obviously are associated, you know, with
certain types of bacterial infections,
you know, um like H pylori. We know that
now it's been proven you know many years
ago that it's associated with you know
gastric cancer and all those but
um what I've seen at least uh is that
when I look at my patient who does have
you know cancer let's say you know
g intestinal cancer carcinoma there are
certain bacterias that are you know
associated with this type of cancer you
know or or you know and what another
thing is that I see is that once they go
into chemotherapy, let's say they
started chemotherapy, you know,
>> these drugs just, you know, they
literally destroy the microbiome such an
extent, you know, that you end up
getting
>> I think one of the reasons, one of the
reasons that obviously besides the side
effects that we know that these drugs
already do.
>> I mean, but one of the reasons why
patients get worse is because their
microbiome has been so compromised, you
know, that it's really hard for them to
get back on track, you know.
>> Absolutely. So this is what I'm I'm
saying. Um okay, you know, important a
healthy microbiome contributes to global
physiological health. Okay. Yes. Um now
you have cancer and we're going to blow
the hell out of your microbiome.
[laughter] It makes no damn sense. You
know, and then they say to you, "Oh,
keep your microbiome healthy while we
poison you." And the blows the hell out
of the microbiome. It makes no damn
sense. The last thing you want to do is
do this to a patient because you need
the microbiome to be healthy so you can
recover. And
>> exactly diarrhea is the clear sign that
your microbiome [laughter]
is not healthy.
>> Exactly. Exactly.
>> So this is the insanity of what we're
doing to these poor cancer patients.
>> I know. I know. Well, and and the thing
is is that when you put we at least when
we put these patients on, you know, uh a
ketogenic restrictive diet, you know,
you know, high fats, a little bit of
protein, and no carb, no, very little
carbs, um their microbiome starts to
improve literally. You know, you start
seeing a shift. You know, I've done so
many microbiome tests and I start
seeing, you know, how they were in the
beginning. Some of them have candida,
some of them have parasites, some have
bed bugs, and you name it. But then you
start
changing the diet and it's incredible
how you start noticing not only
improvements in and alpha diversity of
the microbiome and but you know you
start seeing these good the good
bacteras that we're supposed to be
having starting to come back you know
like acromancia bacteria lactobacillus
you name them and and then you start I I
[laughter] here's the thing is that I
just I have I have this niche I guess
you could say for the microbiome and
vitamin D and metabolic therapy and diet
as a more logical
sensitive, you know, approach for being
able to treat
>> canc I I yeah, I look at those as uh
signs that uh that if you can keep the
microbiome healthy, the vitamin D
levels, all these things uh in a in a
homeostatic uh state in a healthy uh
range uh then we go after the cancer uh
uh and and maintain healthy biome while
we're degrading the tumor. that so we
don't ever want to uh do anything that's
going to reduce the metabolic
homeostasis of health. Um so but what
we're doing now is just the opposite of
of what we're doing. And you also have
to realize the microbiome
in our species can be very varied. Uh
you have to realize uh members of our
ancestorries hundreds of thousands of
years ago. Some of these guys our
ancestors lived in the Arctic Circle.
Uh, some of them lived in the
rainforest. Uh, some of them lived in
the desert. So, the desert microbiome is
not going to be the same thing as the
Arctic microbiome or the rainforest
microbiome.
>> Exactly.
>> We have this incredible flexibility that
we can maintain health uh based on the
cultural and regional microbiome uh uh
of our area of existence. So when we do
metabolic therapy, we have to be
cognizant of cultural and religious
differences in how and how we we uh uh
keep ourselves healthy in these
different conditions. So when I say we
use the glucose ketone index calculator
to determine it whether we're in
metabolic homeostasis, that can be done
with a vegan diet, a carnivore diet, a
medit diet, a pescatarian diet. So you
build the diet around the GKI to
maintain healthy microbiome and other
physiological process. So this makes the
physician he has to be knowledgeable
about these different things when he's
treating his patients. So this is called
precision nutrition.
>> Exactly. Yes. Yes.
>> It's going to be a new field of
medicine.
>> I I I'm 100% on board on that. 100% on
board. You know, I think that's the way
to go. And definitely, you know,
whatever you put into your intestines
go, they definitely, you know, your
microbiome is going to be the first one
to respond out there, you know.
>> Yeah.
>> But and that just just dates back all
the way to hypocrisies, you know. It's
just you were so right on that. Um, but
what I can say for a fact is that I
think one of the major issues I think
that doctors have is that we just lack
enough education on human nutrition. You
know, I mean, at least when I was in
medical school, you know, I didn't If I
did receive any type of education on
nutrition, it would probably be like a
total of pops eight hours max, you know.
Yeah.
>> And that's [clears throat] it. So,
>> well, they gave you the food pyramid and
which is wrong. The food pyramid
>> exactly as well, [laughter]
>> you know. Um, but we go back to our
ancestors and how did they live? What
was the what was the uh h how did and
how do we know that? Because Albert
Schwitzer and others physicians,
humanitarian physicians, they went into
these populations of of folks that live
according to their traditional ways. And
they had infections and they had things,
but they didn't have cancer. Uh, and
they didn't have a lot of the chronic
diseases that that we have. And a lot of
them had a lot of exercise, and they
were eating a lot of natural foods from
the environment. They weren't eating
large amounts of highly processed carbs
that in a package that you could keep on
the shelf for six months and not go bad.
So uh um so you look at it and you see
they slept, they had a better sleeping,
they had more friends, more social
interactions, they weren't sitting in
front of a computer all day or in
traffic. Uh there wasn't anything to
increase the kinds of stress that we
have chronic stress. So you put it all
together, the great American diet and
lifestyle is what's ultimately
responsible for all the health problems.
>> Brazil isn't very far away from that
reality. We we have very similar
problems. You know,
>> that's what I said. The greatest gift of
America is the great American diet and
lifestyle. Obesity, dementia, cancer.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> But people love goodness. Yeah. They
love this stuff. I mean, you can't I
mean, you got to pry them away. You You
know, as I said, you go out to
McDonald's, you don't even have to unask
the car. They they hand you it right
through the window. I mean, that's a
hell of a lot better than having to
track down some deer and kill it,
[laughter] you know,
and then try to, you know, hack apart
his liver and everything to get some
organ, you know. It's it's the uh what
we're we're I tell everybody this. We're
we're still paleolithic people living in
a modern age and our technology evolved
so much faster than our biology.
>> Biological evolution takes eons and
eons. And the obese people we see today
are the living ancestors of those that
survived famine, hardship in the past.
Uh we have an incredible ability to
store energy because we were always
starving.
>> Exactly. Now we have all the stuff that
we've had needed for hundreds of
thousands of years at our fingertips and
we have all these chronic diseases. Not
complicated.
>> I know. I know. It's just it's just
crazy, you know. But I think we I wish I
could, you know, share this video. Once
this video is done, you know, when I
start sharing it to all throughout every
part of, you know, South America and
everyone, I think the biggest challenge
is that you have to really convince
people that diet is like the most
important thing that you can do to be
able to help yourself get better, you
know, especially if you have
>> Well, it's it's it's diet and and and
exercise. Exercise is absolutely
critical.
>> Exercise, of course.
>> No. And and there's and there's several
other of them. Reduce mental stress. Uh
all stress stress screws up your
microbiome and it screws up your health.
Uh poor sleep at night.
>> Um no happiness. You gota you got to be
enjoying things. You know, people are
are grumpy. They're this. They're that.
They're microbiome is screwed up. That
makes them unhappy. You know, it's all
linked to the same the same thing.
Metabolic homeostasis and the enjoyment
of life and exercise. And we're sitting
in traffic. We're not getting the
exercise our ancestors had. So uh when I
say ancestors I'm talking about
paleolithic ancestors
>> of course of course yeah we have the way
our way of life has definitely changed
to a great extent and yeah and I think
that you know even children nowadays
we're seeing such a I mean the incidence
of cancer has just skyrocketed you know
and I just wanted to have your your
thoughts on that and obviously I know
what what the answer is but uh for our
audience you know that are listening um
>> y
>> why do you think why do you think we
have so many diseases not just diabetes,
hypertension, autoimmunity and cancer
but why do you think you know um we just
such have such a high incidence of all
these diseases today.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's our our our diet and
lifestyle is what's is what's killing
us.
>> Um you know it's not a mystery here. Uh
but we've we've produced all of the
things that we've craved in in our
evolutionary past and now we have them
available and that's not how we evolved.
So So you have increases in autism, you
have incre increases in neuroscychiatric
problems, cancer, diabetes, obesity. I
mean all of these are diet and lifestyle
issues. We our gen you know how hard it
is to get cancer. Um, there's a couple
of studies actually. One I think came
out of Brazil uh with Macac monkeys. I I
know it was South America. I'm can't be
sure it was Brazil. They they took these
monkeys because monkeys are genetically
more similar to us than say mice or
rats. [clears throat]
>> We're 50 million years of evolutionary
difference between a mouse and a human.
We share a lot of course but we don't
share everything. But monkeys share a
lot more than us. So they took these
monkeys and we we know that 20
methylanthrine is recognized as a
chemical carcinogen.
>> People know that. So they they rubbed
and they they rubbed the carcinogen onto
the skin of these monkeys year in and
year out and and and the monkeys were
not getting cancer at all. So uh but
they but the the mice and and rats would
get cancer from it. But they were
feeding the mice and rats like a higher
carbohydrate diet than they had. The
monkeys were eating their natural diet.
They didn't get cancer. So then they
started to inject, feed the monkeys the
carcinogen, inject the carcinogen. 10
years and they got one damn monkey that
had some sort of a minor growth. And and
their conclusion of the experiment was
monkeys are not a good model for cancer.
[laughter]
Now, if you took those monkeys and gave
them jelly donuts and Big Macs every day
and rubbed the carcinogen on them, you'd
have an allgether different outcome.
[laughter]
that have a cra bad microbiome. If you
go and you have a cat walk around the
cage putting the fear of God into them,
[laughter]
>> then you could say then you could say
that you have the right model, right?
[laughter]
>> Oh, that's great. That's great.
>> The gorillas and the chimpanzees. I told
you I go to the zoos and I always ask
the veterinarians, "How come you don't
give these guys Big Macs and and and
jelly donuts?" Oh, they it's animal
cruelty. You can't do that. It's
unhealthy.
>> [laughter]
>> They're 98% similar to us.
They have a a zoo in San Diego, the San
Diego Zoo. It's a very famous one. And
they have these bonobos. And
[clears throat] I guess they they they
have a treat. Every week the zookeeper
puts a little honey on a tiny little
plate and and hides the plate somewhere
in this large cage with a natural kind
of environment. But the monkeys know the
bonobos here. They won't come out until
the temperature is 70°. They're one of
these things that they they like to be
comfortable all the time. So they hear
somebody out there and they know that
their that plate is being hidden. So
when they know that come once what
temperature hits 70 degrees, they come
flying out of this cave and they're
tearing up everything looking for the
plate and the the one guy who gets it
keeps it for himself and licks it all
off so nobody else has. [laughter]
>> I said,
>> "Well, they they learned they learned, I
guess."
>> So I said, "Go down and give him a whole
six dozen jelly donuts and see what
happens.
>> [laughter]
>> Well, I guess that's that's how
evolution started. We discovered sugar.
[laughter] Yeah.
>> Well, you know, I always said I always
said I wanted the the one of the
greatest innovations of humankind
besides the development of learning how
to use fire.
>> And there's always a downside to
everything, but who was the first guy to
figure out how you can get honey from a
beehive by smoking the bees so you don't
get stung? Uh the the the dumbass bear
has to stick his nose into the hive, get
his eyes and tongue stung, and he'll
experience the pain just to have the
sweetness from the honey. But you know,
we're smarter than that. We found out if
you smoke these damn bees, they won't
bite you. The dumbass bear doesn't know
this. [laughter]
>> But that's how that's how important
sweetness is for our evolutionary past.
And now we have sweet in everything. We
put high fructose corn syrup into
everything and everybody wonders why
they're demented in fat and and cancer
diabetes. It's unbelievable.
>> It's unbelievable.
[music]
>> Well, you know, Dr. say freed I know
that your time is very limited but I am
very happy you know that [music] you
made some time for me today and uh what
would be your words you know to to
anybody who's going through uh you know
a situation where they might be you know
diagnosed with cancer what would you
tell them you know
>> well I I think the first thing you need
to do is get your GK GKI down as quickly
as possible then go see your oncologist
uh and then then outline a plan uh of
therapy recognizing that cancer is a
metabolic disease and how can their
tools help you manage this. Um so and of
course you're going to get slapped down
most of the time. Uh and it's going to
be very embarrassing for both the
patient and the and the caregiver
because you're raising uncomfortable
things. You're not just following a
standard of care. Don't forget in the
United States we have uh uh uh 1,00
almost 1,700 people. 1,700 a day dying
from cancer, which comes to about 70 an
hour.
>> Can you believe this? That's crazy.
Almost 612,000 a year. And we're not
making any We're not dropping the death
rate at all.
>> It goes up year in and year out. So,
whatever we're doing, it's not working.
>> And metabolic therapy will drop the
death rate. People need to know that if
they want to stay alive, they're going
to have to get the their glucose. And
then we have the meter, the Keto Mojo
meter. You can buy it from Amazon. You
can get all the consumables. So people
can absolutely take charge then you can
consider chemo and radiation and
surgical the other procedures you know
uh but all that is needs to be known.
>> Yeah definitely I I couldn't agree more.
I I think you know um we need to get the
word out. We need pe people to be aware
that there is an option there is an
alternative and that should be actually
the first thing that they should be
choosing to do you know. Um, and in
regards to do you have any words that
you would like to to to send to future
doctors that are becoming well will
become a future doctor, future nurse
practitioner, future healthcare
provider. What would you tell them?
>> Read my book. [laughter]
I got it right over here.
>> Now that let me tell you that is the
correct book. Unfortunately
that on Amazon you'll see all these
other books say written by me. I didn't
write any of those books.
>> Yeah, I'm I'm aware. I know it's it's
cancer as a metabolic disease written by
to Dr. Thomas safe.
>> It has to be by Thomas safe. There are
other books out there. I am aware of
that. You know, I'm going to go ahead
share the link. I'm going to share the
link on your book so people can be able
to find it
>> and make sure that they know uh which
book to to to to buy and be able to
purchase so they can go ahead and read
it. It's a it's a it's a marvelous book
that you wrote. You know, I really
enjoyed it a lot. I think it was a it's
an eyeopener for I think anybody who
reads it, you know, it's going to be a
very big eye opener and
>> and the the book I the book is dedicated
to all the people that suffered and died
from toxic treatments for cancer.
>> I know.
>> So, it's not it's not to any it's to the
field. Um and I apologize for the price.
I did not set the price of that book.
the publishers.
>> Oh, no. I think I mean anybody, you
know, who buys your book, they know what
they're going to be getting. I mean,
this is a precious book, you know, it's
one of a kind, you know, um and anybody,
you know, who obviously is going to be
going through this, you know, and I'm
not only just talking to the patients,
but also referring to anybody who is a
doctor, who is a healthcare provider,
you know, this is a book that you must
learn, you must read it. You know, Dr.
Dr. safer sets everything explains
everything such a nice manner you know
it really it really it really has been a
lifecher for many of my patients you
know and I can't be so thankful you know
for everything that you're doing all
your research please keep on you know
bringing more information to us you know
please keep on the good work that you're
doing Dr. say, you know, you are a a a
light for many. You know, you have no
idea the impact that you're having on my
patients lives, you know. So, I I only
can just say, you know, good things
about you and and commend you for
everything that you're doing and and
just congratulate you, you know, because
uh we need people more people like you
in the world.
>> No, thank you very much. And and you're
one of those new people, too. [laughter]
>> Thank you.
>> Alrighty. Well, uh thank you so much,
Dr. safe for your time. Um, uh, this is
Drs. Thomas Safe. He's the author of
Cancer as a Metabolic Disease. Uh, he is
also the professor at Boston College.
That's correct. And, uh, please take
your time, read the book. It's
excellent. You're going to love it.
>> Okay. Dr. Thomas, thank you so much for
your time. You have been an excellent
uh, person to interview today. you know,
I think what you what you have done, you
know, in regards to the cancer and
everything, uh, therapy as a metabolic
disease is, uh, we need more people like
you in the world.
>> Well, thank you very much. It was a real
pleasure to be here. Thank you.